.. role:: raw-latex(raw)
   :format: latex

.. _sec:intro:

Introduction
============

Bayesian inversion is becoming more and more popular for several years
and it has many advantages compared to conventional optimization
approaches. While other methods often are more constrained and favor one
best model based on the least misfit, an inversion after Bayes theorem
is based on the modelâ€™s likelihood and results in probability
distributions for each parameter of the model. The inversion result is
represented by a collection of models (posterior distribution) that are
consistent with the data and with the selected model priors. They image
the solution space and disclose uncertainties and trade-offs of the
model parameters.

No open-source tools were available that suited our purpose of a joint
inversion of SWD and RF after Bayes using a Markov chain Monte Carlo
(McMC) sampling algorithm, and solve for the velocity-depth structure,
the number of layers, the noise parameters, and the average crustal
:math:`\mathrm{V_P}`/:math:`\mathrm{V_S}` ratio. So it was natural to
take care of this. We developed BayHunter to serve that purpose, and
BayWatch, a module that allows to live-stream the inversion while it is
running.


Bayes theorem
-------------

Bayes theorem (:doc:`Bayes, 1763 <references>`) is based on the
relationship between inverse conditional probabilities. Assuming
observed data :math:`d_{obs}` and a model :math:`m`; the probability
that we observe :math:`d_{obs}` given :math:`m` is :math:`p(d_{obs}|m)`,
and the probability for :math:`m` given :math:`d_{obs}` is
:math:`p(m|d_{obs})`. Both occurrences are also dependent on the
probability that :math:`m` or :math:`d_{obs}` is given, i.e.,
:math:`p(m)` and :math:`p(d_{obs})`.

The inverse conditional probability that both events occur, is given by:

.. math:: p(m|d_{obs}) p(d_{obs}) = p(d_{obs}|m) p(m)

As :math:`d_{obs}` is known as the evidence, i.e., the measurements,
Bayes theorem can be rewritten to:

.. math::
   % posterior $\propto$ likelihood x prior
   p(m|d_{obs}) \propto p(d_{obs}|m) p(m)
   :label: bayes

:math:`p(m|d_{obs})` is the posterior distribution, :math:`p(d_{obs}|m)`
is called the likelihood, and :math:`p(m)` is the prior probability
distribution.

.. _sec:mcmc:

Markov chain Monte Carlo
------------------------

Markov chain Monte Carlo describes a sampling algorithm for sampling
from a probability distribution. This algorithm is a combination of
Monte Carlo, a random sampling method, and Markov chains, assuming a
dependency between the current and the previous sample. For the exact
implementation of the algorithm, see section :doc:`Algorithm <algorithm>`.


.. _fig:mcmc_scheme:

.. figure :: _static/exploration.png

    McMC sampling scheme for one chain progressing through the parameter space. Left and right columns show iterations of the burn-in (first phase) and exploration phase (second phase), respectively, with the black box framing the exploration region as shown in the right column. Illustrated parameters are the likelihood and noise amplitude :math:`\sigma_{SWD}`, surface \vs and \vp/\vs, and number of crustal layers and noise amplitude :math:`\sigma_{RF}`. The top panels reflect the optimization process based on the likelihood, while the lower panels show the parameter trade-off. Example taken from station SL10 in Sri Lanka.


:numref:`Figure {number} <fig:mcmc_scheme>` shows a real data
example from a station in Sri Lanka (SL10), following the evolution of
one chain through the model parameter space. Parameters are shown in
couples, but note that the parameter space is multidimensional. In the
burn-in phase (left column) the chain starts at a random parameter
combination in the solution space and progresses with ongoing iterations
towards an optimum, based on the likelihood. In the second phase (right
column) the chain has already reached its exploration region and samples
the posterior distribution.

.. _fig:mcmc_chains:

.. figure :: _static/exploration_chains.png

  McMC sampling scheme for one hundred chains progressing independently through the parameter space. Same parameters and parameter space as illustrated in :numref:`Figure {number} <fig:mcmc_scheme>`. Black cross shows the median from the complete posterior distribution (exploration phase). Example taken from station SL10 in Sri Lanka.

:numref:`Figure {number} <fig:mcmc_chains>` shows one hundred
independent chains exploring the same parameter space. Each chain starts
with a different random model, yet most chains converge to the same exploration region for sampling the posterior distribution. There are
still chains (e.g., the two rose colored ones in the middle panel) that
have not converged into the optimum zone when entering the exploration
phase. If those chains do not converge to that optimum zone within the
second phase, they probably represent outlier chains (or secondary
minima) and should not be considered for the posterior distribution.
